
DATA WRANGLING IN MySQL

Data wrangling is a process where raw data is tranformed and made ready for analysis
In this project we'll use MySQL to wrangle the data for further analysis. 

DESCRIPTION
This dataset was obtained from kaggle: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/rickyrrii/old-car-price-data
It contains information about various cars' specs and it's is made up of 26 rows and 199 columns. 
The columns contains data about the car price, make, fuel type, number of wheels, width, height, etc. 

We will cover the following steps:
1. Backup table
2. Data Cleaning (duplicates and missing values)
3. Data Transformation
4. Data Standardization 
5. Binning


1. FIRST THINGS FIRST
Before messing with the data, we started by creating a backup table so that if something goes wrong there's an original data to revert to


2. DATA CLEANING

2.1. FINDING DUPLICATES

We did a subquery and partitioned it over every column and there we co duplicates found in our data

2.2. MISSING VALUES

Steps for working with missing data:
    a). Identify missing data
    b). Deal with missing data
    c). Correct data format

Missing values in our dataset are represented by '?', so we went through each and every column and we found a total of 45 ?s
     * 39 in normalized_losses
     * 2 in num_of_doors
     * 4 in Price
Now we'll have to decide what to do with the missing data, there are ways to deal with them
     a).  Drop the data (drop the whole column or drop by row)
     b). Replace the data (by Frequency in categirical values or Average in numerical values )

   * Drop the whole column - this method should only be used when the entire column is empty, or not useful
         Reason - there are some useful values in the column
   * Drop by row - we'll use this method on the price column. 
         Reason - because the price is what we're trying to predict. Any data entry without the price data cannot be used for prediction,
	therefore, any row without the price is not useful to us.
   * Replace by frequency - we'll use this methos on num_of_doors  
         Reason - 84% of sedans in our data is four doors. Since four doors is most frequent, it is most likely to occur
   * Replace by average - we'll use this method on normalized_losses
          Reason - it is a numerical data, and has no frequent values we can use


3. DATA TRANSFORMATION

We'll now tranform our data into a more readable format

a). Renaming the columns and removing unwanted characters
The price column contains some unwated characters, let's fix that.
     * Renaming the column from `price;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;price` to price.
     * Removed the trailing ';'
     * And updated the table

b). Changing the data types
     * The normalized_losses and price columns  are numerical values but were stored in a text format,
           so we changed them from TEXT to INT
 

4. DATA STANDARDIZATION

Standardization is the process of transforming data into a common format which allows the researcher 
to make the meaningful comparison.

In our dataset, the fuel consumption columns "city-mpg" and "highway-mpg" are represented by mpg (miles per gallon) unit. 
Assume we are developing an application in a country that accept the fuel consumption with L/100km standard,
we will need to apply data transformation to transform mpg into L/100km?

The formula for unit conversion is : L/100km = 235.2145 / mpg
      *  We have transformed the values in the columns "city-mpg" and "highway-mpg"  from miles per gallon to L/100km
      *  And changed their data type from INT to DOUBLE


5. BINNING

Binning is a process of transforming continuous numerical variables into discrete categorical 'bins', for grouped analysis.

In our dataset, "horsepower" is a real valued variable ranging from 48 to 268, it has 57 unique values. 
What if we only care about the price difference between cars with low, medium, high and very high horsepower? 
We can rearrange them into four segments ‘bins' to simplify the analysis.

We also updated the table and changed the data type from INT to TEXT


